---
title: using firebase as a free rest api
layout: post
---

If you've seen alot of movies, there may come a point where you have trouble finding the next good film to watch. Imdb is a great resource for quickly finding information on a specific movie or actor, but not as great at displaying relationships between them. You may know that Denzel Washington is your favorite actor, but not which of his 54 credits are worth your time.


Luckily imdb makes all this information available in text format, which can be parsed, filtered, and transformed into json. Learning from previous work, it was decided to store our movie data somewhere that would not have to be maintained. While not designed to be used as a rest api, Firebase is versatile enough for this purpose. More then just a document store, it provides some sort and search capability which allows us to query without writing our own backend code.

    x.firebaseio.com/tevs.json?orderBy=\"$key\"&limitToFirst={count}&startAt=\"{key}\"
    
By keying our movies with a url encoded version of their name, this more or less allows us to search by movie title. Again learning from the complexity of previous apps, getting movie recommendations would be a simple two step process. The general flow of our app would be to allow the user to search for a movie they already know, then aggregate all the movies related through the cast and use some heuristic to rank them as suggestions.


In addition to searching by title, it is necessary to easily move both ways across relationships between actors and films by just accessing our firebase api. As such, each actor object would hold a list of movie ids, and each movie would hold a list of cast ids. Because firebase limits us to a single key per object, movie data has to be duplicated and stored a second time in order to allow a second lookup by id. In retrospect, it would have been sufficient to reference movies by string and reuse the earlier dataset. Firebase does store sparse arrays and objects differently than arrays, so there may be some performance benefit with this method.


One of the caveats of android development is that it is not possible to fully control the lifecycle of an app. External factors, for example if the phone is rotated into landscape view, can cause our activity's process to be destroyed and recreated. Relying on state stored in the activity can easily cause crashes due to null errors, or at best, require users to redo network calls to our api. It is both easier to reason about and more robust to decouple our long running background tasks from our activity process.

 
Thanks to Otto, an open source message bus from <a href="http://square.github.io/">square</a>, it is simple for the two parts of our application to communicate. Otto communicates with events. To begin our search, a search event is posted from our activity with a property containing the query string. In our service, an annotated subscriber method is called, which handles calling our api and parsing the results. Our service in turn posts a result event, which could be handled by zero, one, or multiple subscribers.

  
In this case, there will only ever be at most one subscriber, in our activity class. In the case the activty is in a transient state, in between being shut down and recreated, there will be no active subscriber, however our results will not be lost. Otto also provides a producer annotation, which is called immediately whenever a subscriber registers to listen for an event. Whenever our new activity is created, this provider will immediately run, returning the most recent result (which we cached in our service).

  
Because of the nature of our app, there are many api calls, each returning data which must then be aggregated before returning a result. Because Firebase is primarily a real time streaming service, not a restful api provider, the official android library for firebase was awkward to use for our purpose. Due to this, a basic library for making http calls to firebase in parallel was created, using a similiar api to firebase's own library.

  
