---
title: Using dnxcore crossplatform
layout: post
---

While I have been running c# applications on linux under mono for quite some time, I have been following the progress of asp.net 5 and waiting for the right time to try the new coreclr. Although the samples on Microsoft's github are quite simple and it can be confusing to make the leap to a more complicated application, I was able to find a comfortable workflow with some trial and error.

the coreclr works cross platform by allowing you to choose which version to run on, based on the operating system and architecture. You are able to manage this through a command line tool called  dot net version manager (dnvm). This tool simply downloads the appropriate runtime and then configures some enviroment variables which determine what dnx executable will run.

There are currently two versions of dnvm, one is written in bash and the other in powershell. While the docs on the dnvm github recommend using powershell on windows, I prefer to do my work in cygwin. Unfortunately it did not work out of the box on windows for me, but I was able to add windows support and made a pull request. I will have to do some more work before it is accepted, but you may find my version at https://raw.githubusercontent.com/slofurno/Home/dev/dnvm.sh. To run it just type source dnvm.sh after opening your shell, or add it to one of your rc files.

with dnvm installed you can grab the latest dnx by running

    dnvm install -r coreclr -arch x64 latest -OS win -u

The other significant change is how you will be mananging your project dependencies. The runtime is now broken up into many small assemblies, which are all hosted on nuget. Configuration is done with a project.json file, and you are responsible for including any dependencies your project needs for each runtime target you wish to compile for. Again microsoft provides some examples on their github, or you may check out one of mine here https://github.com/slofurno/fsharp-playground/blob/master/fplayground/project.json.

You can set both global dependencies, or per individual target framework. If you have any local dependencies, such as a class library you have created yourself, you must make it available on nuget or add your own nuget package source to the project's nuget.config. The runtime then selects the correct assembly to use based on convention of the directory.

packaging a class library for multiple target runtimes can be an simple as putting together the project.json, running dnu.cmd restore and dnu.cmd build [--configuration release], and finally putting together a nuget spec file and running nuget pack on it. The nuget spec has some metadata, most critically the package name and version number which you must later reference in any project you want to use it from. It also has references to the assemblies which are included in the package, for example:
